********
Glossary
********

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2


.. glossary::


A-G
===

  APSOC
   All Programmable System on Chip

  ADC
   Analog to Digital Converter

  DAC
   Digital to Analog Converter

  DPOT
   Digital Potentiometer

  FPGA
   Field Programmable Gate Array

  FTDI
   Future Technology Devices International Ltd, supplier of the FT2232HQ USB-UART bridge chip used on ZYBO.  Free USB-COM port
   drivers, available from www.ftdichip.com under the "Virtual Com Port" or VCP heading, convert USB packets to
   UART/serial port data. Serial port data is exchanged with the Zynq using a two-wire serial port (TXD/RXD). After the
   drivers are installed, I/O commands can be used from the PC directed to the COM port to produce serial data
   traffic on the Zynq pins.

H-R
===

  I2C
    See IIC

  IIC
   Inter-Integrated Circuit; multi-master, multi-slave, single-ended, serial computer bus protocol

  IOPs
   Input/Output Processors

  PMod
   Peripheral Module - accessory boards to add functionality to the platform. e.g. ADC, DAC, I/O interfaces, sensors etc.

  PModIO
   PMod IO overlay

  (Micro) SD
   Secure Digital (Memory Card standard)

  REPL
   A read–eval–print loop (REPL), also known as an interactive toplevel or language shell, is a simple, interactive computer     programming environment that takes single user inputs (i.e. single expressions), evaluates them, and returns the result to the user; a program written in a REPL environment is executed piecewise. The term is most usually used to refer to programming interfaces similar to the classic Lisp machine interactive environment. Common examples include command line shells and similar environments for programming languages, and is particularly characteristic of scripting languages `wikipedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read%E2%80%93eval%E2%80%93print_loop>`_


S-Z
===

  SOC
   System On Chip

  SPI
   Serial Peripheral Interface; synchronous serial communication interface specification 

  UART
   Universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter; Serial communication protocol

  XADC
   Xilinx ADC - Analog to Digital Converter found on all Xilinx 7 series devices

  ZYBO
   ZYnq BOard

  Zynq
   Xilinx device with ARM processor and FPGA fabric on the same chip

  Zynq PL
   Programmable Logic - FPGA fabric

  Zynq PS
   Processing System - SOC processing subsystem built around dual-core, Cortex-A9 processors
