.. _pynq-overlays:

*************
PYNQ Overlays
*************

The Xilinx速 Zynq速 All Programmable device is an SOC based on a dual-core ARM速
Cortex速-A9 processor (referred to as the *Processing System* or **PS**),
integrated with FPGA fabric (referred to as *Programmable Logic* or **PL**). The
*PS* subsystem includes a number of dedicated peripherals (memory controllers,
USB, Uart, IIC, SPI etc) and can be extended with additional hardware IP in a
*PL* Overlay.

.. image:: images/zynq_block_diagram.jpg
   :align: center

Overlays, or hardware libraries, are programmable/configurable FPGA designs that
extend the user application from the Processing System of the Zynq into the
Programmable Logic. Overlays can be used to accelerate a software application,
or to customize the hardware platform for a particular application.

For example, image processing is a typical application where the FPGAs can
provide acceleration. A software programmer can use an overlay in a similar way
to a software library to run some of the image processing functions (e.g. edge
detect, thresholding etc.) on the FPGA fabric.  Overlays can be loaded to the
FPGA dynamically, as required, just like a software library. In this example,
separate image processing functions could be implemented in different overlays
and loaded from Python on demand.

PYNQ provides a Python interface to allow overlays in the *PL* to be controlled
from Python running in the *PS*. FPGA design is a specialized task which
requires hardware engineering knowledge and expertise. PYNQ overlays are created
by hardware designers, and wrapped with this PYNQ Python API. Software
developers can then use the Python interface to program and control specialized
hardware overlays without needing to design an overlay themselves. This is
analogous to software libraries created by expert developers which are then used
by many other software developers working at the application level.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1
    :hidden:
   
    pynq_overlays/loading_an_overlay.ipynb
    pynq_overlays/pynqz1
    pynq_overlays/pynqz2
